>> Brangham: ON THIS EDITION FOR
SATURDAY, OCTOBER 8: JUST FOUR
WEEKS BEFORE ELECTION DAY, WILL
A DECADE-OLD RECORDING OF DONALD
TRUMP'S OFFENSIVE REMARKS ABOUT
WOMEN UPEND THE PRESIDENTIAL
RACE?
AND HURRICANE MATTHEW CONTINUES
ITS PATH OF DESTRUCTION UP THE
EAST COAST.
>> WE HAVE TEN TO 15 INCHES OF
RAIN EXPECTED.
TEN TO 15 INCHES OF RAIN.
THAT'S A LOT.
>> Brangham: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
>> Brangham: GOOD EVENING, AND
THANK YOU FOR JOINING US.
DONALD TRUMP'S PRESIDENTIAL
CAMPAIGN IS IN FULL THROTTLE
DAMAGE CONTROL MODE FOLLOWING
YESTERDAY'S RELEASE OF AN 11-
YEAR-OLD VIDEOTAPE SHOWING HIM
MAKING VULGAR SEXUAL REMARKS
DEMEANING TO WOMEN.
TODAY, TRUMP TOLD "THE WALL
STREET JOURNAL" THERE IS "ZERO
CHANCE I'LL QUIT" THE RACE FOR
THE WHITE HOUSE, THIS DESPITE
WIDESPREAD CONDEMNATION FROM
REPUBLICAN PARTY LEADERS.
TRUMP ALSO TOLD "THE WASHINGTON
POST," WHICH FIRST PUBLISHED THE
VIDEO ON ITS WEB SITE, "I'D
NEVER WITHDRAW.
I'VE NEVER WITHDRAWN IN MY
LIFE."
TRUMP TOLD THE NEWSPAPER HE
STILL HAS "UNBELIEVABLE" AND
"TREMENDOUS" SUPPORT.
HE BEGAN HIS PUSHBACK OVERNIGHT
WITH THIS 90-SECOND VIDEO.
>> I'VE NEVER SAID I'M A PERFECT
PERSON NOR PRETENDED TO BE
SOMEONE THAT I'M NOT.
I'VE SAID AND DONE THINGS I
REGRET, AND THE WORDS RELEASED
TODAY ON THIS MORE THAN A
DECADE-OLD VIDEO ARE ONE OF
THEM.
ANYONE WHO KNOWS ME KNOWS THESE
WORDS DON'T REFLECT WHO I AM.
I SAID IT, I WAS WRONG AND I
APOLOGIZE.
>> Brangham: THE RECORDING IN
QUESTION REVEALED TRUMP, WHO
SEEMINGLY DIDN'T KNOW HIS
MICROPHONE WAS ON, TELLING AN
ENTERTAINMENT REPORTER HOW HE
COULD EASILY MAKE SEXUAL
ADVANCES ON WOMEN BECAUSE HE WAS
FAMOUS.
HE ALSO BOASTED OF GROPING WOMEN
BY THEIR GENITALS AND
PROPOSITIONING A MARRIED WOMAN.
IN HIS APOLOGY, TRUMP PLEDGED TO
"BE A BETTER MAN."
BUT HE CALLED THE 11-YEAR-OLD
VIDEO A "DISTRACTION" FROM THE
REAL ISSUES, AND THEN HIS
STATEMENT MORPHED INTO AN ATTACK
ON BILL AND HILLARY CLINTON.
>> I'VE SAID SOME FOOLISH
THINGS, BUT THERE IS A BIG
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE WORDS AND
ACTIONS OF OTHER PEOPLE.
BILL CLINTON HAS ACTUALLY ABUSED
WOMEN, AND HILLARY HAS BULLIED,
ATTACKED, SHAMED AND INTIMIDATED
HIS VICTIMS.
>> Brangham: TRUMP'S RUNNING
MATE, INDIANA GOVERNOR MIKE
PENCE, SAYS HE WAS OFFENDED BY
THE 2005 RECORDING.
IN A WRITTEN STATEMENT, PENCE
SAID: "I DO NOT CONDONE HIS
REMARKS AND CANNOT DEFEND THEM.
I AM GRATEFUL THAT HE HAS
EXPRESSED REMORSE AND APOLOGIZED
TO THE AMERICAN PEOPLE."
PENCE WAS A NO-SHOW IN WISCONSIN
TODAY AT A REPUBLICAN FUNDRAISER
HOSTED BY SPEAKER OF THE HOUSE
OF REPRESENTATIVES, PAUL RYAN.
RYAN HAD ANNOUNCED PENCE WOULD
BE THERE AFTER HE DISINVITED
TRUMP, RYAN SAYING HE WAS
"SICKENED" BY TRUMP'S COMMENTS.
SENATE REPUBLICAN MAJORITY
LEADER MITCH McCONNELL CALLED
TRUMP'S COMMENTS "REPUGNANT AND
UNACCEPTABLE."
THE LAST TWO REPUBLICAN
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEES CONDEMNED
TRUMP, MITT ROMNEY CALLING HIS
COMMENTS "VILE" AND SENATOR JOHN
McCAIN SAYING THERE WERE "NO
EXCUSES" FOR THEM.
SOUTH DAKOTA SENATOR JOHN THUNE,
NUMBER THREE IN THE SENATE
REPUBLICAN LEADERSHIP, WENT
FURTHER, SAYING: "DONALD TRUMP
SHOULD WITHDRAW, AND MIKE PENCE
SHOULD BE OUR NOMINEE EFFECTIVE
IMMEDIATELY."
ILLINOIS REPUBLICAN SENATOR MARK
KIRK, WHO IS IN A TOUGH
REELECTION CAMPAIGN, AGREED THAT
TRUMP SHOULD STEP ASIDE, CALLING
HIM "A MALIGNANT CLOWN."
NEW HAMPSHIRE REPUBLICAN SENATOR
KELLY AYOTTE, ALSO IN A VERY
COMPETITIVE RACE, SAID SHE WOULD
WRITE IN PENCE FOR PRESIDENT.
SHE ANNOUNCED ON TWITTER TODAY:
"I CANNOT AND WILL NOT SUPPORT A
CANDIDATE FOR PRESIDENT WHO
BRAGS ABOUT DEGRADING AND
ASSAULTING WOMEN."
UTAH CONGRESSMAN JASON CHAFFETZ
IS AMONG THE GROWING NUMBER OF
REPUBLICAN MEMBERS OF THE HOUSE
OF REPRESENTATIVES RENOUNCING
THEIR PREVIOUS SUPPORT FOR
TRUMP.
>> I CAN'T LOOK MY 15-YEAR-OLD
DAUGHTER IN THE EYE AND TELL HER
I ENDORSE THIS PERSON TO BECOME
THE PRESIDENT OF THE UNITED
STATES.
I JUST... I JUST CAN'T DO IT.
>> Brangham: FINALLY, DEMOCRATIC
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE HILLARY
CLINTON SAID OF THE LEWD TRUMP
VIDEO: "THIS IS HORRIFIC.
WE CANNOT ALLOW THIS MAN TO
BECOME PRESIDENT."
FOR MORE ON THESE DEVELOPMENTS
AND THEIR IMPACT ON THE
ELECTION, I AM JOINED FROM
WASHINGTON BY ROGER SIMON.
HE'S THE CHIEF COLUMNIST FOR
"POLITICO."
ROGER, WELCOME.
I'M CURIOUS, WHEN YOU FIRST SAW
THIS VIDEOTAPE, THIS RECORDING,
WHAT WAS YOUR REACTION?
>> WELL, I THINK LIKE 99% OF
AMERICA, I WAS ABSOLUTELY
STUNNED.
I WAS FLOORED THAT, YOU KNOW, A
GUY WHO IS 59 YEARS OLD SHOULD
BE BEHAVING THIS WAY AND ACTING
THIS WAY.
IT WAS FRAT BOY CULTURE, BUT
HE'S NO LONGER A FRAT BOY.
>> Brangham: IN MOST
CIRCUMSTANCES, IN MOST
BUSINESSES, THIS TALK OF PREYING
ON WOMEN LIKE THIS WOULD GET YOU
FIRED, BUT TRUMP IS IN THIS
UNUSUAL POSITION WHERE HE'S
SOMEWHAT BULLET-PROOF.
HE'S THE NOMINEE.
HE SAYS HE'S NOT GOING ANYWHERE.
HIS WIFE SAID I'VE FORGIVEN HIM.
LET'S MOVE ON.
IF THE G.O.P. LEADERSHIP WANTED
TO DO SOMETHING AND GET HIM OFF
THE TICKET IS THERE ANY
PRACTICAL WAY THEY COULD DO
THAT?
>> I THINK THEY COULD.
I THINK IT WOULD BE LEGALLY
MESSY.
I THINK IT WOULD BE DIFFICULT.
I THINK THE ONLY THING WORSE
THAN DOING IT MIGHT BE NOT DOING
IT.
BUT ONE OF THE PROBLEMS IS IS
THAT MILLIONS OF AMERICANS HAVE
ALREADY VOTED, USING EARLY
BALLOTS.
SO THEY'VE MARKED BALLOTS FOR
HIM, AND FOR HILLARY CLINTON,
AND SO WHAT DO YOU DO WITH THOSE
BALLOTS?
BUT, YOU KNOW, IF YOU REALLY--
IF THE REPUBLICAN PARTY REALLY
DECIDED THAT HE MUST GO, THEN
YOU CAN JUST HOPE THAT IT WOULD
BE LIKE RICHARD NIXON, WHERE THE
ELDERS OF THE PARTY GO TO HIM
AND SAY, "MR. PRESIDENT, YOU
GOTTA STEP DOWN, "OR "MR. TRUMP,
YOU'VE JUST GOT TO STEP DOWN FOR
THE GOOD OF THE PARTY."
>> Brangham: WELL, IN THE
CURRENTLY CURRENT POLITICAL
LANDSCAPE.
WHO ARE THOSE ELDERS?
( LAUGHTER )
>> THAT'S A GOOD QUESTION.
YOU KNOW, IT WOULD HAVE TO BE
THE REPUBLICAN LEADERS OF
CONGRESS, AND IT WOULD HAVE TO
BE-- I THINK IT WOULD HAVE TO BE
HIS-- PENCE, HIS VICE
PRESIDENTIAL NOMINEE, WHO HAS
DONE SUPPORT FOR HIM, BUT I
WOULDN'T CALL IT UNLIMITED
SUPPORT.
IT WAS HEDGED A LITTLE BIT.
AND I THINK PENCE WAS LEAVING
THE DOOR OPEN FOR SAYING, YOU
KNOW, IF ANYTHING MORE COMES
OUT, I'M JUST GOING TO STEP AWAY
FROM THIS TICKET.
AND THE REPUBLICAN PARTY CAN
FIND A NEW VICE PRESIDENTIAL
NOMINEE.
>> Brangham: I MEAN, YOU HAVE,
OBVIOUSLY, COVERED A LOT OF
ELECTIONS.
AND I'M JUST CURIOUS, WE ARE
WEEKS AWAY FROM AN ELECTION.
WE HAVE A CAN CAN BE IN ANOTHER
DAY.
YOU HAVE EVER SEEN ANYTHING LIKE
THIS?
DOES THIS STRIKE YOU AS AN
UNPRECEDENTED MOMENT?
I KNOW WE'VE HAD A LOT IN THIS
CAMPAIGN.
>> IT STRIKES ME AS AN
UNPRECEDENTED MOMENT.
YOU KNOW, I'VE BEEN ASKED THAT A
LOT ABOUT PAST CRISES IN THIS
CAMPAIGN.
I DON'T USE THE WORD LOOSELY,
BUT I'VE BEEN DOING THIS SINCE
1976, AND I HAVE NEVER SEEN A
PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN LIKE THIS.
>> Brangham: I MEAN,
OBVIOUSLY, ONE OF THE THINGS
THAT THIS HAS IT TO PUT A LOT OF
PRESSURE ON IS DOWN-BALLOT
REPUBLICANS.
AND IT SEEMS LIKE IN THE NEXT
DAYS, MANY OF THEM HAVE ALREADY
COME OUT, AND SOME OF THEM ARE
TRYING TO WALK THAT LINE BETWEEN
DECRYING HIS COMMENT AND-- BUT
YET NOT SAYING THAT THEY'RE NOT
GOING TO SUPPORT HIM.
DOESN'T THIS PUT PRESSURE ON
EVERY SINGLE DOWN-BALLOT
REPUBLICAN WHO IS IN A CAN CLOSE
RACE TO RECKON WITH THESE AWFUL
COMMENT?
>> IT DOES PUT PRESSURE ON THEM.
AND THAT'S WHY SOME ARE STEPPING
AWAY FROM HIM.
THEY'RE DESERTING HIM IN THE
SENSE THAT THEY'RE NOT GOING TO
GO OUT AND CAMPAIGN FOR HIM OR
WITH HIM.
WHAT THEY'RE SAYING IS HE'S
RUNNING HIS RACE.
I'M RUNNING MINE.
JUST FORGET ABOUT HIM.
CONCENTRATE ON ME.
BUT IF THERE'S ONE OTHER GROUP I
CAN MENTION IN HERE, IT'S THE
WOMEN OF THE UNITED STATES.
THEY'RE THE ONES WHO HAVE REALLY
BEEN VICTIMIZED HERE-- NOT THE
GUYS IN CONGRESS WHO HAVE NICE
JOBS AND MIGHT BE RE-ELECTED OR
NOT RE-ELECTED.
BUT WHEN YOU EXAMINE MR. TRUMP'S
STATEMENTS, HE-- IT IS A
STATEMENT OF A SERIAL SEXUAL
PREDATOR, AND WE REALIZE THAT
OUR MOTHERS AND SISTERS AND
FAMILY MEMBERS ARE TREATED THIS
WAY EVERY DAY, AND IT'S
IMPORTANT, I THINK, THAT WE KEEP
THAT IN MIND WHEN WE'RE THINKING
ABOUT HOW WE MOVE FORWARD FROM
THIS MOMENT.
>> Brangham: ALL RIGHT, ROGER
SIMON FROM POLITICO.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Brangham: SEE MORE OF HOW
REPUBLICAN ELECTED OFFICIALS AND
LEADERS ARE REACTING TO DONALD
TRUMP'S COMMENTS ABOUT WOMEN.
VISIT www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Brangham: HURRICANE MATTHEW
HAS WEAKENED TO A CATEGORY ONE
STORM BUT STILL REMAINS A THREAT
TO THE COASTS OF GEORGIA AND THE
CAROLINAS AS IT CONTINUES TO
CRAWL UP THE EASTERN SEABOARD.
TONIGHT, THE STORM'S CENTER IS
ALONG NORTH CAROLINA'S COAST.
EARLY TODAY, THE STORM BATTERED
THE COAST OF SOUTH CAROLINA WITH
WINDS UP TO 85 MILES AN HOUR.
HIGH WINDS AND HEAVY RAIN
BATTERED MYRTLE BEACH, THE SOUTH
CAROLINA VACATION SPOT.
MATTHEW'S STORM SURGE LEFT
ANOTHER SOUTH CAROLINA CITY,
HISTORIC CHARLESTON, UNDER SIX
FEET OF FLOOD WATERS.
IN GEORGIA, SAVANNAH SHARED THE
SAME FATE, WITH HIGH WINDS
TOPPLING MANY OF THE CITY'S
TOWERING TREES.
AT LEAST TWO PEOPLE IN GEORGIA
DIED FROM THE STORM.
NORTH CAROLINA GOVERNOR PAT
McCRORY SAYS THE STORM HAS
KILLED AT LEAST THREE PEOPLE IN
HIS STATE AND WARNED RESIDENTS
IN THE STORM'S PATH TO EVACUATE.
>> WE HAVE TEN TO 15 INCHES OF
RAIN EXPECTED.
TEN TO 15 INCHES OF RAIN.
THAT'S A LOT IN THE SOUTHEASTERN
NORTH CAROLINA.
AND IF YOU ARE IN A LOW-LYING
AREA-- AND YOU KNOW YOU ARE IN A
LOW-LYING AREA THAT'S FLOODED
WITH A LOT LESS RAIN THAN THAT--
IT'S TIME TO GET OUT OF THERE.
>> Brangham: AFTER LEAVING ITS
MARK ON SOUTHERN NORTH CAROLINA,
REMNANTS OF THE STORM ARE
EXPECTED TO LOOP BACK DOWN SOUTH
WHERE THEY CAME FROM IN THE
CARIBBEAN.
THE STORM IS ALSO BLAMED FOR AT
LEAST FIVE DEATHS IN FLORIDA.
THE STORM'S 120-MILE-AN-HOUR
WINDS ALSO DOWNED POWER LINES
ALONG THE STATE'S ATLANTIC
COAST, LEAVING 800,000 OF
FLORIDA'S 20 MILLION RESIDENTS
WITHOUT ELECTRICITY TODAY.
IN FLORIDA'S LARGEST CITY,
JACKSONVILLE, 500,000 PEOPLE
REMAIN UNDER EVACUATION ORDERS.
MATTHEW'S STORM SURGE CAUSED
MASSIVE FLOODING THERE
YESTERDAY, WHICH ONLY GOT WORSE
TODAY.
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND ANCHOR HARI
SREENIVASAN IS 40 MILES SOUTH OF
JACKSONVILLE, IN ST. AUGUSTINE,
AND HAS BEEN FOLLOWING THE PATH
OF THE STORM.
>> Sreenivasan: IN ORLANDO,
FLORIDA, WE MET DAVE FLOYD WHO
RODE OUT HURRICANE MATTHEW WITH
HIS FAMILY AND PETS IN A HOTEL.
FLOYD IS A LANDLORD, AND AFTER
THE STORM PASSED YESTERDAY, HE
HEADED TO TITUSVILLE, ABOUT 40
MILES EAST, NEAR THE ATLANTIC
COAST.
A TENANT HAD TOLD HIM ABOUT
MASSIVE LEAKS IN ONE OF THE
TOWNHOUSES HE OWNS.
FLOYD ARRIVED TO FIND THE STORM
HAD RIPPED UP PART OF THE FLAT
ROOF, AND WATER WAS POURING INTO
THE HOUSE.
STAR PRESTON LIVED IN THE HOUSE
WITH HER HUSBAND AND THREE KIDS.
>> WE'RE OUT OF THE HOME.
WHAT AM I GOING TO DO?
(SOBS)
>> Sreenivasan: FLOYD HAS
ALREADY SUBMITTED AN INSURANCE
CLAIM ON THE HOUSE, BUT HE
THINKS IT WILL LIKELY BE WEEKS
BEFORE THE HOUSE IS HABITABLE
AGAIN.
IN THE MEANTIME, HE'S TRYING TO
ARRANGE TEMPORARY HOUSING FOR
HIS TENANT THROUGH FEMA OR THE
RED CROSS.
>> MY FIRST CONCERN WAS TO FIND
THESE PEOPLE A PLACE TO STAY.
AND THAT'S MY OBLIGATION AS A
LANDLORD, TO PROVIDE THEM WITH
SOME TYPE OF HOUSING OR SHORT-
TERM ACCOMMODATIONS UNTIL MY
INSURANCE COMPANY CAN GET OUT
HERE AND ASSESS THE DAMAGE.
>> Sreenivasan: LAST NIGHT,
PRESTON AND HER FAMILY WERE ABLE
TO STAY WITH HER SISTER WHO
LIVES NEARBY.
BUT NOW, SHE DOESN'T KNOW WHERE
THEY'LL GO NEXT.
FROM TITUSVILLE, WE HEADED ABOUT
AN HOUR UP THE FLORIDA COAST TO
ORMOND BEACH, WHERE WIND MORE
THAN WATER WAS THE BIGGEST
THREAT TO PROPERTY.
PEOPLE PROBABLY MOVED HERE FOR
THIS NICE TREE-LINED STREET, AND
NOW THIS CANOPY OF BEAUTIFUL
TREES IS A LIABILITY.
WE FOUND DEBBIE MOHN, A NURSE
WHO JUST CAME BACK FROM A THREE-
DAY SHIFT AT THE HOSPITAL TO
FIND THE OAK TREE THAT HAD STOOD
ON HER PROPERTY FOR DECADES
SPLIT IN TWO-- HALF IN THE
STREET, THE OTHER HALF LEANING
NOW ON HER ROOF.
>> YOU LIKE MY TREE HOUSE?
>> Sreenivasan: YOU'VE GOT A
SENSE OF HUMOR ABOUT IT.
WHAT WENT THROUGH YOUR MIND WHEN
YOU SAW IT?
>> I DIDN'T WANT TO LOOK AT
THIS.
I PARKED OVER THERE AND THEN
WENT INTO THE HOUSE FIRST TO SEE
IF I COULD SEE DAYLIGHT THROUGH
MY ROOF BECAUSE MY HUSBAND
REALLY DIDN'T WANT TO TELL ME
EVERYTHING.
BUT HE SAID WE'RE OKAY.
SO, WIND INSTEAD OF WATER.
I'LL TAKE THAT BECAUSE WATER, WE
COULD BE LOUISIANA RIGHT NOW.
>> Sreenivasan: HER HUSBAND RODE
OUT THE STORM IN THEIR HOUSE
WITH THEIR TWO DOGS.
THE COUPLE PLANS TO STAY THERE
WHILE THEY WAIT FOR THE POWER
AND WATER TO COME BACK ON.
>> Brangham: AND HARI JOINS ME
NOW FROM ST. AUGUSTINE.
HARI, WE SAW THE PEOPLE IN YOUR
PIECE STARTING TO RECKON WITH
THE DAMAGE TO THEIR HOMES AND
THEIR PROPERTY.
WHAT'S IT LIKE WHERE YOU ARE
NOW?
>> Sreenivasan: WE WENT TO ONE
SECTION OF ST. AUGUSTINE WHERE
WE SAW SOME PEOPLE THAT WERE
TRYING TO DRY OUT THEIR HOUSES.
THEY PROBABLY HAD 10, 14 INCHES
OF WATER.
THAT IS NOTHING COMPARED TO
ANOTHER SECTION JUST ABOUT TWO
MILES AWAY CALLED VELANNO BEACH.
THAT AREA IS STILL CLOSED OFF
BECAUSE THERE'S PROBABLY THREE
TO FOUR FEET OF STANDING WATER,
ACCORDING TO SOME OF RESIDENTS
WHO TRIED TO RIDE OUT THE STORM.
THAT AREA HAS BEEN DECLARED
CATASTROPHIC.
THERE ARE HOMES THAT HAVE KIND
OF COLLAPSED ON TO EACH OTHER.
THE ISLAND WAS SORT OF
SURROUNDED BY WATER, SO THE
INLET ACTUALLY CREATED A
BACK-SLOG, IF YOU WILL.
THIS IS AN AREA THAT IS TO HAVE
TO TAKE SEVERAL DAYS TO TRY TO
LITERALLY PUMP THE WATER OUT
OF THEIR HOMES AND DRY OUT.
>> Brangham: AND ARE YOU
SEEING ANY EVIDENCE OF RESCUE
EFFORTS?
ARE YOU SEEING FEMA OR THE RED
CROSS?
WHAT DOES THE RECOVERY EFFORT
LOOK LIKE WHERE YOU ARE?
>> Sreenivasan: SO, THERE HAVE
BEEN RED CROSS SHELTERS THAT
HAVE BEEN SET UP, UP AND DOWN
THE COAST.
ONE OF THE IRONIES IS TODAY,
GLORIOUS SUNNY DAY, TOMORROW IS
ALSO GOING TO BE THE SAME.
SO THE PEOPLE STAYING IN THESE
SHELTERS DURING THE DAY, THEY'RE
JUST ANXIOUS TO TRY TO GET BACK
INTO THEIR HOMES, ESPECIALLY IF
IT WAS IN THOSE AREAS THAT HAS
BEEN SEALED OFF.
SO THEY WANT TO GET THERE.
AND, OF COURSE, THE AUTHORITIES
DON'T WANT TO LET THEM BACK
IN.
RIGHT NOW THERE'S NO POWER.
THERE ARE STILL POWER LINES
DOWN.
THERE'S NO WATER.
THAT HAS BEEN TURNED OFF.
SO BASIC INFRASTRUCTURE IS NOT
THERE TO LET THESE PEOPLE BACK
IN.
IT'S A LONG, SLOW PHASE-BACK.
THE RECOVERY EFFORTS, THIS IS
HOW LONG IT TAKES TO GET
THROUGH.
BUT I DON'T THINK ANYBODY
EXPECTED AS MUCH OF THE
COASTLINE TO BE HIT BY ONE
SINGLE HURRICANE.
>> Brangham: I MEAN,
OBVIOUSLY, AS YOU'RE DESCRIBE
IT, AS THE PICTURES WE'VE BEEN
SEEING, THEY'RE SHOWING
INCREDIBLE DAMAGE AND THERE'S
BEEN SOME LOSS OF LIFE THERE,
BUT THIS WAS PREDICTED TO BE
MUCH WORSE.
IS THERE ANY SENSE FROM PEOPLE
YOU HAVE BEEN TALKING TO THAT
THEY MIGHT HAVE DODGED A MUCH
BIGGER BULLET?
>> Sreenivasan: YEAH.
YOU KNOW, EVERYBODY AROUND HERE
WAS WATCHING ALL THE LOCAL NEWS
CHANNELS AND WHEN THAT 11:00
FORECAST CAME IN AND THEY SAID,
"THE EYE OF THIS STORM IS ABOUT
NINE TO 15 MILES FURTHER AWAY
FROM THE COAST," THAT WAS A HUGE
SIGH OF RELIEF BECAUSE IF IN
THOSE NINE OR 10 MILES YOU HAD
120, 130-MILE-PER-HOUR WINDS AND
IF THAT WAS EVEN CLOSER TO THE
COAST, THAT MEANS EVERYWHERE I'M
STANDING NOW WOULD HAVE BEEN
UNDER SERIOUS HURRICANE CATEGORY
THREE-TYPE WINDS.
FORTUNATELY, FOR THIS AREA, EVEN
AS BAD AS IT WAS, IT COULD HAVE
BEEN MUCH WORSE, AND MOST OF THE
PEOPLE COMING BACK TO THEIR
HOMES RIGHT NOW, THEY'RE
THANKFUL THAT THEY HAVE THEIR
HEALTH.
THEY'RE THANKFUL THAT THEY HAVE
THEIR FAMILIES AND THEY DO THINK
THEY DODGED A BULLET, AS
DIFFICULT AS IT MAY BE TO
RECOVER FROM THIS.
>> Brangham: ALL RIGHT, HARI
SREENIVASAN FROM ST. AUGUSTINE,
FLORIDA.
THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> THANKS, WILLIAM.
>> Brangham: THE MOST SEVERE
DAMAGE FROM HURRICANE MATTHEW
HAS OCCURRED IN THE CARIBBEAN,
PARTICULARLY ON THE ISLAND
NATION OF HAITI, WHICH IS THE
POOREST COUNTRY IN THE WESTERN
HEMISPHERE.
AUTHORITIES THERE SAY THEY
BELIEVE THE STORM CAUSED
HUNDREDS OF DEATHS AND HAS
DISPLACED THOUSANDS MORE.
THE UNITED NATIONS SAYS 750,000
HAITIANS NEED HUMANITARIAN AID
IMMEDIATELY.
FOR MORE ON THE SITUATION THERE,
I AM JOINED VIA TELEPHONE BY
JOURNALIST INGRID ARNESON.
SHE'S IN THE CAPITAL, PORT-AU-
PRINCE.
INGRID, THANK YOU VERY, VERY
MUCH FOR BEING HERE.
CAN YOU GIVE US A SENSE OF WHAT
YOU'VE BEEN SEEING?
HOW BAD IS IT THERE RIGHT NOW?
>> WILLIAM, THE FULL IMPACT OF
HURRICANE MATTHEW IS ONLY
EMERGING NOW.
THE HARDEST HIT AREA, IN THE
SOUTHERN PENINSULA, WAS HIT
CATASTROPHICALLY.
IN TERMS OF PORT-AU-PRINCE,
PORT-AU-PRINCE IS RESUMING
NATURAL ACTIVITY.
THERE'S BEEN TWO DAYS OF
SUNSHINE.
THE WATERS ARE RECEDING, BUT THE
WORST HIT, CATASTROPHICALLY FOR
THE COUNTRY ON AN ECONOMIC,
ECOLOGICAL, HUMANITARIAN SCALE
IS THE SOUTHERN REGION,
WHICH COMPRISES HAITI.
>> Brangham: AND GOING FORWARD
TODAY, TOMORROW, EARLY NEXT
WEEK, WHAT ARE THE BIGGEST
CHALLENGES FACING RESCUERS AND
AID AGENCIES?
>> THE BIGGEST CHALLENGES
ARE GETTING TO THE AREA.
I SPOKE TO THE WORLD FOOD
PROGRAM YESTERDAY, AND THEY SAID
THAT AS OF NOW, THEY STILL DON'T
KNOW HOW TO GET SUPPLIES TO THE
AREA, ALTHOUGH THEY DID HAVE
SOME PREPOSITIONED BEFOREHAND.
BUT, OF COURSE, NOT ENOUGH FOR
THE HUNDREDS OF THOUSANDS OF
PEOPLE THAT ARE STRANDED THAT
WERE VICTIMS OF THE HURRICANE.
THE PEOPLE ARE NEEDING WATER,
ARE NEEDING FOOD, ARE NEEDING
MEDICAL SUPPLIES, ARE NEEDING
SHELTERS.
FROM EARLY REPORTS THAT CAME IN
YESTERDAY, THE WHOLE AREA WAS
FLATTENED COMPLETELY.
>> Brangham: I UNDERSTAND THAT
TOMORROW IS GOING TO BE THE
PRESIDENTIAL ELECTION IN HAITI.
OBVIOUSLY, THAT'S NOT GOING TO
HAPPEN AT THIS POINT.
BUT DOES THIS POWER VACUUM-- I
DON'T KNOW IF THAT'S THE RIGHT
TERM FOR IT-- DOES THIS HAVE ANY
BEARING ON HOW THE RESCUE
EFFORTS ARE GOING FORWARD?
>> I DON'T BELIEVE SO BECAUSE
ALL THE INTERNATIONAL
HUMANITARIAN AGENCIES THAT WERE
HERE FOR THE EARTHQUAKE IN
JANUARY 2010 ARE HERE AND PRETTY
MUCH TAKING OVER THE
HUMANITARIAN EFFORT FOR THE
SOUTHERN SIDE OF THE ISLAND.
BUT, HOWEVER, IT'S ANOTHER STORM
FOR HAITI, A POLITICAL STORM.
THE MUCH-AWAITED ELECTIONS HAVE
BEEN POSTPONED, AND THIS IS
AFTER TWO FAILED ATTEMPTS TO
ELECT A PRESIDENT SINCE FORMER
PRESIDENT LEFT OFFICE IN APRIL
OF 2015.
THE, YOU KNOW, INSTITUTIONS
CANNOT FUNCTION.
THE MINISTRIES WILL HAVE TO BE
REELECTED.
IT'S HANDICAPPED GOVERNANCE.
>> Brangham: YOU HAVE BEEN
COVERING HAITI SINCE THE
MID-1980s, AND OBVIOUSLY THE
COUNTRY IS STILL DEALING WITH
THE AFTER-EFFECTS OF THE
TERRIBLE EARTHQUAKE IN 2010.
WHAT IS YOUR SENSE ABOUT THE
LONG-TERM ABILITY OF HAITI TO
RECOVER FROM THAT BLOW AND NOW
THIS BLOW?
>> WELL, THE 2010 JANUARY
EARTHQUAKE LEFT HAITI BASICALLY
50 YEARS BACK ECONOMICALLY AND
IN TERMS OF RECONSTRUCTION SINCE
THE CAPITAL WAS FLATTENED.
MOVING FORWARD TO TODAY,
HURRICANE MATTHEW HAS CARVED YET
ANOTHER DISASTROUS DENT INTO
HAITI'S EFFORTS TO RECOVER FROM
THE EARTHQUAKE.
WITH THE ELECTION BEING
POSTPONED, THAT MEANS THAT THERE
IS ISN'T REALLY A-- THE
SOLID INSTITUTIONS THAT ARE
NEEDED TO DEAL WITH THESE KINDS
OF DISASTERS ARE NOT REALLY
FORMED, AND THEY WON'T BE FORMED
UNTIL THERE'S A FORMAL PRESIDENT
ELECTED, AND THAT TAKES OFFICE.
FOR NOW, THEY'VE BEEN FLOATING
ALONG.
HOWEVER, I JUST WANT TO ADD, IN
TERMS OF HURRICANE MATTHEW'S
DAMAGE, WHAT'S EMERGING IS AN
ECOLOGICAL DISASTER.
THE TREES WERE RIPPED OUT IN
THIS AREA, WHICH IS THE
AGRICULTURAL BASKET OF HAITI.
ALL THEIR AGRICULTURAL EXPORTS--
MANGO, RICE, CORN, PAPAYAS--
EVERYTHING ELSE.
AND AS WE KNOW ALREADY, HAITI
SUFFERS FROM DEFORESTATION, 90%
OF THE COUNTRY.
THIS WAS POSSIBLY THE ONLY
REGION THAT WAS AS RICH IN SOIL
AND IN VEGETATION.
SO IT'S A HUGE, HUGE, HUGE
IMPACT ECONOMICALLY.
>> Brangham: ALL RIGHT,
JOURNALIST INGRID ARNESON, THANK
YOU VERY, VERY MUCH FOR BEING
HERE.
>> THANK YOU, PLEASURE.
>> Brangham: SOME NEWLY-LEAKED
EMAILS HAVE REVEALED THE DETAILS
OF WHAT HILLARY CLINTON SAID IN
PAID SPEECHES, MOSTLY TO BANKS,
THAT SHE GAVE BEFORE LAUNCHING
HER PRESIDENTIAL CAMPAIGN.
IN HACKED EMAILS BETWEEN CLINTON
CAMPAIGN CHAIRMAN JOHN PODESTA
AND STAFF MEMBERS POSTED
YESTERDAY BY WIKILEAKS, CLINTON
IS QUOTED TELLING BANKERS THAT
WALL STREET IS BEST QUALIFIED TO
REFORM THE FINANCIAL SECTOR.
CLINTON IS ALSO QUOTED AS SAYING
SHE FAVORED "OPEN TRADE AND OPEN
BORDERS" OF A COMMON MARKET
BETWEEN NORTH AND SOUTH AMERICA.
IN AN EXCERPT FROM ANOTHER
SPEECH, CLINTON SAID SHE WAS
"KIND OF FAR REMOVED" FROM THE
CONCERNS OF THE MIDDLE CLASS.
DURING THE PRESIDENTIAL
PRIMARIES, CLINTON REFUSED CALLS
BY RIVAL BERNIE SANDERS TO
RELEASE TRANSCRIPTS OF THOSE
SPEECHES.
RUSSIA IS DENYING ACCUSATIONS
THAT IT'S TRYING TO INTERFERE
WITH THE U.S. ELECTION OR THAT
IT'S RESPONSIBLE FOR HACKING
EMAILS OF THE DEMOCRATIC PARTY.
THE RUSSIAN FOREIGN MINISTRY
TODAY CALLED THE ACCUSATIONS
MADE YESTERDAY BY THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION AND TOP U.S.
NATIONAL SECURITY OFFICIALS AS
"ANTI-RUSSIAN HYSTERIA."
THE ADMINISTRATION SAID THERE
WAS CLEAR EVIDENCE RUSSIA HACKED
DEMOCRATIC PARTY ORGANIZATIONS
EARLIER THIS YEAR AND FUNNELED
THEM TO WIKILEAKS AND OTHER WEB
SITES.
BUT THE FOREIGN MINISTRY SAID,
"THERE IS NO PROOF WHATSOEVER
FOR SUCH GRAVE ACCUSATIONS."
AND OFFICIALS IN YEMEN SAY AT
LEAST 82 PEOPLE WERE KILLED
TODAY WHEN WARPLANES FROM THE
SAUDI-LED COALITION BOMBED A
FUNERAL HALL IN THE REBEL-HELD
CAPITAL.
MORE THAN 500 OTHER PEOPLE WERE
INJURED.
THE FUNERAL HALL WAS CROWDED
WITH OFFICIALS AND OTHERS WHO'D
GATHERED TO MOURN THE FATHER OF
THE INTERIOR MINISTER IN THE
SHIITE REBEL GOVERNMENT
THE SAUDI COALITION BACKS THE
INTERNATIONALLY-RECOGNIZED
GOVERNMENT OF PRESIDENT HADI,
WHO FLED THE COUNTRY LAST YEAR
AMONGST YEMEN'S ONGOING CIVIL
WAR.
>> SENATOR, YOU'RE NO JACK
KENNEDY.
>> I ALMOST RESENT, VICE
PRESIDENT BUSH, YOUR
PATRONIZING.
>> WHOLE BINDERS FULL OF WOMEN.
>> I OPPOSED THE DEATH PENALTY
DURING ALL OF MY LIFE.
>> INTERACT WITH ALL THE GENERAL
ELECTION DEBATES ON OUR WEB
SITE, watchthedebates.org.
>> Brangham: UPDATING OUR LEAD
STORY, LONGTIME ARIZONA SENATOR
JOHN McCAIN, WHO IS IN A CLOSE
RACE, IS WITHDRAWING HIS SUPPORT
FOR DONALD TRUMP.
McCAIN SAID LATE TODAY:
REPUBLICAN CONGRESSMAN JOE
HECHT, ALSO RUNNING FOR A CLOSE
RACE FOR NEVADA'S OPEN SENATE
SEAT, SAID TODAY HE COULD NOT
VOTE FOR TRUMP BECAUSE:
AND THE WOMAN CONSIDERED ONE OF
TRUMP'S BIGGEST BOOSTERS IN THE
U.S. SENATE, NEBRASKA'S DEBRA
FISHER, SAID TODAY IT WOULD BE
WISE FOR TRUMP TO STEP ASIDE AS
THE PARTY'S NOMINEE.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
THE PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M WILLIAM BRANGHAM.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.
GOOD NIGHT.